                                                                                      Appendix C   359   359



Appendix C

Executive Order-- National Commission on the BP
Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling

By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution and the laws of the United
States of America, it is hereby ordered as follows:

Section 1. Establishment. There is established the National Commission on the BP
Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling (the “Commission”).

Sec. 2. Membership. (a) The Commission shall be composed of not more than 7 members
who shall be appointed by the President. The members shall be drawn from among
distinguished individuals, and may include those with experience in or representing the
scientific, engineering, and environmental communities, the oil and gas industry, or any
other area determined by the President to be of value to the Commission in carrying out its
duties.

(b) The President shall designate from among the Commission members two members to
    serve as Co Chairs.

Sec. 3. Mission. The Commission shall:

(a) examine the relevant facts and circumstances concerning the root causes of the
    Deepwater Horizon oil disaster;

(b) develop options for guarding against, and mitigating the impact of, oil spills associated
    with offshore drilling, taking into consideration the environmental, public health, and
    economic effects of such options, including options involving:

   (1) improvements to Federal laws, regulations, and industry practices applicable to
       offshore drilling that would ensure effective oversight, monitoring, and response
       capabilities; protect public health and safety, occupational health and safety, and
       the environment and natural resources; and address affected communities; and

   (2) organizational or other reforms of Federal agencies or processes necessary to ensure
       such improvements are implemented and maintained.

(c) submit a final public report to the President with its findings and options for
    consideration within 6 months of the date of the Commission’s first meeting.

Sec. 4. Administration. (a) The Commission shall hold public hearings and shall
request information including relevant documents from Federal, State, and local officials,
nongovernmental organizations, private entities, scientific institutions, industry and
