356   Appendix A




      Appendix A

      Commission Members

                                     SENATOR BOB GRAHAM, Co-Chair, is the former two-term
                                     governor of Florida and served for 18 years in the United States
                                     Senate. After retiring from public life in January 2005, Senator
                                     Graham served for a year as a senior fellow at the Harvard
                                     Kennedy School of Government. There he commenced writing
                                     America, the Owner’s Manual, published in 2009 as a guide to
                                     participatory citizenship. From May 2008 to February 2010,
                                     he served as chairman of the Commission on the Prevention of
                                     Weapons of Mass Destruction Proliferation and Terrorism, and
                                     currently serves as a member of the Financial Crisis Inquiry
                                     Commission and the CIA’s Executive Advisory Board.



                                     WILLIAM K. REILLY, Co-Chair, is a founding partner of Aqua
                                     International Partners, LP, a private equity fund dedicated
                                     to investing in companies engaged in water and renewable
                                     energy, and a senior advisor to TPG Capital, LP, an international
                                     investment partnership. He co-chaired the National Commission
                                     on Energy Policy. Mr. Reilly served as Administrator of the U.S.
                                     Environmental Protection Agency (1989-1993) and president of
                                     World Wildlife Fund (1985-1989). He also served as the head of
                                     the U.S. delegation to the United Nations Earth Summit at Rio in
                                     1992.
      Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images




                                     FRANCES G. BEINECKE, Member, is the President of the Natural
                                     Resources Defense Council (NRDC), a non-profit corporation that
                                     works to advance environmental policy in the United States and
                                     across the world. In addition, Ms. Beinecke currently serves on the
                                     Board of the World Resources Institute and the steering committees
                                     of the U.S. Climate Action Partnership. She is a member of the
                                     Aspen Institute’s Commission on Arctic Climate Change, and on
                                     the advisory boards of the Yale School of Management and the
                                     Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Science.
