                                                                                    Chapter Nine   265   265



 •   NOAA and other federal agencies with appropriate expertise should be encouraged to
     act as cooperating agencies in NEPA reviews of offshore energy production activities,
     including exploration and development plans and drilling permit applications. Federal
     agencies that submit comments to Interior as part of a NEPA process should receive
     a written response indicating how the information was applied and if it was not
     included, why it was not included.



C. Strengthening Oil Spill Response, Planning, and
Capacity

Just as the events of April 20, 2010 exposed a regulatory regime that had not kept up
with the industry it was responsible for overseeing, the events that unfolded in subsequent
weeks and months made it dismayingly clear that neither BP nor the federal government
was prepared to deal with a spill of the magnitude and complexity of the Deepwater Horizon
disaster. This section discusses the Commission’s recommendations in the area of oil spill
response and planning. Broadly speaking they address three critical issues or gaps in the
government’s existing response capacity: (1) the failure to plan effectively for a large-scale,
difficult-to-contain spill in the deepwater environment or potentially in the Arctic; (2) the
difficulty of coordinating with state and local government officials to deliver an effective
response; and (3) a lack of information and understanding concerning the efficacy of
specific response measures, such as dispersants and berms.

1. The Need for Improved Oil Spill Response Planning
Oil spill response planning and analysis across the government needs to be overhauled in
light of the lessons of the Deepwater Horizon blowout. A common interagency approach to
analyzing oil spill risks and a common understanding of the issues and impacts involved
are needed and must be consistently incorporated in environmental reviews, consultations,
and authorizations. Environmental review and spill planning currently occurs at different
levels within the government and industry, and these reviews and plans have not been
sufficiently coordinated to ensure either searching review of industry plans or adequate
preparation.

One of the common threads that runs through many of the environmental review
documents prepared for Gulf of Mexico oil and gas activities in the years leading up to the
Deepwater Horizon spill was their reliance on MMS oil spill risk and impact analyses. To the
extent that any of these documents contained errors or incomplete information, those gaps
and errors carried through to subsequent environmental reviews by other agencies.

The government’s spill-response planning occurs largely outside of MMS. The National
Contingency Plan, mandated by the Clean Water Act, prescribes the nationwide response
structure for spills of oil or releases of hazardous substances and creates a tiered planning
process. Regional Response Teams include representation from federal agencies and state
governments, and develop Regional Contingency Plans as well as preauthorization
protocols for certain response strategies. The Area Committees, which develop Area
