                                                                                       Chapter Nine   269   269



EPA and the Coast Guard, as the chair and vice-chair of the National Response Team,
should issue policies and guidance for increased state and local involvement in oil spill
contingency planning and training. This guidance should provide protocols to:

 •   Include local officials from areas at high risk for oil spills in training exercises.

 •   Establish liaisons between the Unified Command and affected local communities at
     the outset of a spill response.

 •   Add a local on-scene coordinator position to the Unified Command structure.

 •   Provide additional clarification and guidance to federal, state, and local officials on
     the differences between emergency response under the Stafford Act and under the
     National Contingency Plan.

In addition, a mechanism should be created for ongoing local involvement in spill
planning and response in the Gulf. In the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, Congress mandated
citizens’ councils for Prince William Sound and Cook Inlet. In the Gulf, such a council
should broadly represent the citizens’ interests in the area, such as fishing and tourism,
and possibly include representation from oil and gas workers as ex-officio, non-voting
members. The citizens’ group could be funded by Gulf lease holders. The Commission
further recommends that federal regulators be required to consult with the council
on relevant issues, that operators provide the council with access to records and other
information, and that entities (either in industry or in government) declining the council’s
advice submit their reasons to the council in writing.

4. The Need for Increased Research and Development to Improve Spill
Response
The technology available for cleaning up oil spills has improved only incrementally since
1990. Federal research and development programs in this area are underfunded: In fact,
Congress has never appropriated even half the full amount authorized by the Oil Pollution
Act of 1990 for oil spill research and development. In addition, the major oil companies
have committed minimal resources to in-house research and development related to spill
response technology. Oil spill removal organizations are underfunded in general and
dedicate few if any resources to research and development. Though some commentators
and industry representatives have argued that more research and development would not
have allowed for a more effective spill response because no technology will ever collect
more than a fraction of spilled oil, the fact is that neither industry nor government has
made significant investments in improving the menu of response options or significantly
improved their effectiveness. Thus any argument about the limited potential of response
technology is speculative. After the Deepwater Horizon spill, agencies, industry, and
entrepreneurs focused attention on developing new response technologies for the first time
in 20 years, and a number of promising options emerged within a relatively short period
of time—including beach-cleaning machines, subsea dispersant delivery systems, and new
in situ burning techniques.
