10   National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling




     The air smelled and tasted of some kind of fuel. A second explosion roared through,
     flinging Bertone across his room. He stood up, pulled on his coveralls, work boots, and
     hard hat, and grabbed a life vest. Out in the hall, clogged with debris from blown-out
     walls and ceilings, four or five men stood in shock. Bertone yelled to them to go out by the
     port forward or starboard forward spiral staircases and report to their emergency stations.
     He ran toward the bridge.89

     He went to the portside back computer, the dynamic positioning system responsible for
     maintaining the rig’s position. “I observed that we had no engines, no thrusters, no power
     whatsoever. I picked up the phone which was right there and I tried calling extension 2268,
     which is the engine control room. There was no dial tone whatsoever.” It was then that
     Bertone looked out to the bridge’s starboard window. “I was fully expecting to see steel
     and pipe and everything on the rig floor.” “When I looked out the window, I saw fire from
     derrick leg to derrick leg and as high as I could see. At that point, I realized that we had
     just had a blowout.”90

     Fleytas hit the general alarm.91 The alarm went off: “Report to emergency stations and
     lifeboats.” The rig crew heard: “This is not a drill. This is not a drill.”92 Fleytas, realizing
     that the rig had not yet issued a Mayday call, sent it out.93 Out in the dark of the Gulf,
     three friends on the 31-foot Ramblin’ Wreck were out on the water for a day of tuna
     fishing.94 Around 9:45 p.m., Bradley Shivers trained his binoculars at a brilliant light
     in the distance and realized it must be an oil rig on fire.95 On their radio, they heard,
     “Mayday, Mayday, Mayday, this is the Deepwater Horizon. We are on fire.”96 At that
     moment they “heard and felt a concussive sonic boom.”97 The Ramblin’ Wreck headed to
     the scene, their first tuna outing of the year cut short. 98

     Bertone was now back to his station on the bridge, thinking, “The engines should be
     starting up because in approximately 25 to 30 seconds two engines start up, come
     online. . . . There was still no power of any kind. No engines starting; no indication of
     engines starting.”99

     At that moment, the water-tight door to his left banged open and he heard someone
     say, “The engine room ECR [engine control room] and pump room are gone. They are
     all gone.” Bertone turned around, “What do you mean gone?” The man speaking was
     so coated in blood Bertone had no idea who he was. Then he recognized the voice. It was
     Mike Williams. Bertone saw how badly lacerated Williams’s forehead was, grabbed a roll
     of toilet paper from the bathroom, pressed it on the wound to staunch the bleeding, and
     ordered, “Hold this here.”100

     Then he went back to his station and looked at his screen. “There was still nothing, no
     engines starting, no thrusters running, nothing. We were still [a] dead ship.”101

     He heard the water-tight door slam again and saw another man soaked in blood, holding
     a rag to his head, repeating, “I’m hurt. I’m hurt bad, Chief. I’m hurt real bad.” It was the
     voice of Brent Mansfield, a Transocean marine engineer. Bertone pulled back Mansfield’s
