defenses that the Office expected Mr. Trump to raise at trial. The third section explains why the

Special Counsel's decision to prosecute Mr. Trump was fully consistent with and indeed was

compelled by the Principles of Federal Prosecution. The fourth section describes the Office's

investigative procedures and policies. Finally, the fifth section of this Volume discusses a series

of investigative and prosecutive issues that the Office confronted in the Election Case.

I.      THE RESULTS OF THE INVESTIGATION 1

        In 2020, then-President Donald J. Trump ran for reelection against Joseph R. Biden, Jr.

Mr. Trump lost. 2 As alleged in the original and superseding indictments, substantial evidence

demonstrates that Mr. Trump then engaged in an unprecedented criminal effort to overturn the

legitimate results of the election in order to retain power. 3 Although he did so primarily in his

private capacity as a candidate, and with the assistance of multiple private co-conspirators, Mr.

Trump also attempted to use the power and authority of the United States Government in

furtherance of his scheme.

        As set forth in the original and superseding indictments, when it became clear that Mr.

Trump had lost the election and that lawful means of challenging the election results had failed,

he reso1ied to a series of criminal efforts to retain power. This included attempts to induce state

1 This section of the Report summarizes the evidence uncovered by the Office's investigation, and therefore includes

conduct for which the Supreme Court later held Mr. Trump to be immune from prosecution, see Trump v. United
States, 603 U.S. 593, 597 (2024). That conduct is not included in the superseding indictment that the Office
obtained after the Supreme Court's decision, see ECF No. 226, nor is that conduct included in the discussion below
regarding why the evidence warranted criminal charges under the Principles of Federal Prosecution. Unless
otherwise noted, all ECF citations in this Volume of the Report are to the docket in United States v. Trump, No.
23-cr-257 (D.D.C.).
2 SC0-00701211 at 7 (Federal Election Commission, Election Results for 2020 Federal Elections).

3 An indictment is an allegation, not a verdict; a person accused of a crime is presumed innocent until proven guilty

beyond a reasonable doubt. The Office was prepared to present the evidence of Mr. Trump's alleged crimes in a
public adversarial trial and to accept any verdicts rendered by a jury of his peers. As explained below, the Office
commenced prosecution of Mr. Trump in the Election Case under both the original and superseding indictments
because it concluded that the admissible evidence would be sufficient to obtain and sustain a conviction. See Justice
Manual § 9-27 .220 and infra at Section III.




                                                         2
