 officials to ignore true vote counts; to manufacture fraudulent slates of presidential electors in

 seven states that he had lost; to force Justice Department officials and his own Vice President,

 Michael R. Pence, to act in contravention of their oaths and to instead advance Mr. Trump's

 personal interests; and, on January 6, 2021, to direct an angry mob to the United States Capitol to

 obstruct the congressional certification of the presidential election and then leverage rioters'

 violence to further delay it. 4 In service of these efforts, Mr. Trump worked with other people to

 achieve a common plan: to overturn the election results and perpetuate himself in office. These

 individuals included Co-Conspirator 1, a private attorney who was willing to spread knowingly

 false claims and pursue strategies that Mr. Trump's Campaign attorneys would not;

 Co-Conspirator 2, a private attorney who devised and attempted to implement a strategy to

leverage the Vice President's ministerial role in the certification proceeding to obstruct the

certification; Co-Conspirator 3, a private attorney whose unfounded claims of election fraud Mr.

Trump privately acknowledged were "crazy," but which he embraced and publicly amplified

nonetheless; Co-Conspirator 4, a Justice Department official who worked on civil matters and

who, with Mr. Trump, attempted to use the Justice Department to open sham election crime

investigations and influence state legislatures with knowingly false claims of election fraud;

Co-Conspirator 5, a private attorney who assisted in devising and attempting to implement a plan

to submit fraudulent slates of presidential electors to obstruct the certification proceeding; and

Co-Conspirator 6, a private political consultant who helped implement a plan to submit

fraudulent slates of presidential electors to obstruct the certification proceeding. 5         The

throughline of all of Mr. Trump's criminal efforts was deceit-knowingly false claims of election


4 ECF No.   l at 110; ECF No. 226 at 1 11; see ECF No. 252 at 3.
5 ECF No.   l at 1 8; ECF No. 226 at 19; see ECF No. 252 at 4.




                                                         3
