                                                        6

(S&P), the nation’s two largest credit rating agencies, the Subcommittee identified multiple
problems responsible for the inaccurate ratings, including conflicts of interest that placed
achieving market share and increased revenues ahead of ensuring accurate ratings.

        Between 2004 and 2007, Moody’s and S&P issued credit ratings for tens of thousands of
U.S. residential mortgage backed securities (RMBS) and collateralized debt obligations (CDO).
Taking in increasing revenue from Wall Street firms, Moody’s and S&P issued AAA and other
investment grade credit ratings for the vast majority of those RMBS and CDO securities,
deeming them safe investments even though many relied on high risk home loans. 1 In late
2006, high risk mortgages began incurring delinquencies and defaults at an alarming rate.
Despite signs of a deteriorating mortgage market, Moody’s and S&P continued for six months to
issue investment grade ratings for numerous RMBS and CDO securities.

        Then, in July 2007, as mortgage delinquencies intensified and RMBS and CDO securities
began incurring losses, both companies abruptly reversed course and began downgrading at
record numbers hundreds and then thousands of their RMBS and CDO ratings, some less than a
year old. Investors like banks, pension funds, and insurance companies, who are by rule barred
from owning low rated securities, were forced to sell off their downgraded RMBS and CDO
holdings, because they had lost their investment grade status. RMBS and CDO securities held
by financial firms lost much of their value, and new securitizations were unable to find investors.
The subprime RMBS market initially froze and then collapsed, leaving investors and financial
firms around the world holding unmarketable subprime RMBS securities that were plummeting
in value. A few months later, the CDO market collapsed as well.

        Traditionally, investments holding AAA ratings have had a less than 1% probability of
incurring defaults. But in 2007, the vast majority of RMBS and CDO securities with AAA
ratings incurred substantial losses; some failed outright. Analysts have determined that over
90% of the AAA ratings given to subprime RMBS securities originated in 2006 and 2007 were
later downgraded by the credit rating agencies to junk status. In the case of Long Beach, 75 out
of 75 AAA rated Long Beach securities issued in 2006, were later downgraded to junk status,
defaulted, or withdrawn. Investors and financial institutions holding the AAA rated securities
lost significant value. Those widespread losses led, in turn, to a loss of investor confidence in
the value of the AAA rating, in the holdings of major U.S. financial institutions, and even in the
viability of U.S. financial markets.

        Inaccurate AAA credit ratings introduced risk into the U.S. financial system and
constituted a key cause of the financial crisis. In addition, the July mass downgrades, which
were unprecedented in number and scope, precipitated the collapse of the RMBS and CDO
secondary markets, and perhaps more than any other single event triggered the beginning of the
financial crisis.



1
 S&P issues ratings using the “AAA” designation; Moody’s equivalent rating is “Aaa.” For ease of reference, this
Report will refer to both ratings as “AAA.”
