                                                377

        In connection with the hearing, the Subcommittee released a joint memorandum from
Chairman Levin and Ranking Member Coburn summarizing the investigation to date into the
role of the investment banks in the financial crisis. The memorandum contained the following
findings of fact, which this Report reaffirms, regarding the Goldman Sachs case study.

       1. Securitizing High Risk Mortgages. From 2004 to 2007, in exchange for lucrative
          fees, Goldman Sachs helped lenders like Long Beach, Fremont, and New Century,
          securitize high risk, poor quality loans, obtain favorable credit ratings for the resulting
          residential mortgage backed securities (RMBS), and sell the RMBS securities to
          investors, pushing billions of dollars of risky mortgages into the financial system.

       2. Magnifying Risk. Goldman Sachs magnified the impact of toxic mortgages on
          financial markets by re-securitizing RMBS securities in collateralized debt obligations
          (CDOs), referencing them in synthetic CDOs, selling the CDO securities to investors,
          and using credit default swaps and index trading to profit from the failure of the same
          RMBS and CDO securities it sold.

       3. Shorting the Mortgage Market. As high risk mortgage delinquencies increased, and
          RMBS and CDO securities began to lose value, Goldman Sachs took a net short
          position on the mortgage market, remaining net short throughout 2007, and cashed in
          very large short positions, generating billions of dollars in gain.

       4. Conflict Between Client Interests and Proprietary Trading. In 2007, Goldman
          Sachs went beyond its role as market maker for clients seeking to buy or sell
          mortgage related securities, traded billions of dollars in mortgage related assets for the
          benefit of the firm without disclosing its proprietary positions to clients, and
          instructed its sales force to sell mortgage related assets, including high risk RMBS
          and CDO securities that Goldman Sachs wanted to get off its books, and utilizing key
          roles in CDO transactions to promote its own interests at the expense of investors,
          creating a conflict between the firm’s proprietary interests and the interests of its
          clients.

       5. Abacus Transaction. Goldman Sachs structured, underwrote, and sold a synthetic
          CDO called Abacus 2007-AC1, did not disclose to the Moody’s analyst overseeing
          the rating of the CDO that a hedge fund client taking a short position in the CDO had
          helped to select the referenced assets, and also did not disclose that fact to other
          investors.

       6. Using Naked Credit Default Swaps. Goldman Sachs used credit default swaps
          (CDS) on assets it did not own to bet against the mortgage market through single
          name and index CDS transactions, generating substantial revenues in the process.
