                                                  146

                WALK-UP MUSIC
                FOR DAVID SCHNEIDER

                                            DAVID SCHNEIDER
                Thank you ladies and gentlemen, and welcome to this very special Awards
                Evening.

                Wow, could you feel the energy and excitement tonight out on the Red Carpet?!
                Talk about star power!

                And it was great fun to learn so much more about some of you during the
                interviews … and at the bar.

                But don’t worry. I’m told that the age-old tradition here at Washington Mutual is,
                ‘What happens at President’s Club stays at President’s Club.’ And who am I to
                mess with tradition?

                Tonight we are gathered together to pay the highest respects and honors to those
                who deserve them the most, the President’s Club Class of 2005. …

                And of course I want to pay special homage to all of you astonishing returning
                champions of President’s Club. You multiple award-winning superstars clearly
                lead our entire industry as the standard others can only attempt to match. You
                folks really do make this feel like the academy awards tonight because
                everywhere I turn I see another star of another box office sensation.” 545

This 2005 awards ceremony was attended by WaMu loan officers Luis Fragoso and Thomas
Ramirez at the same time they were under investigation for fraud. Both were members of the
President’s Club in 2005 and 2006.

        When asked about the sales culture at the bank, Mr. Vanasek testified at the hearing that
he tried in vain to counter it. He recalled one occasion at an annual management retreat in 2004,
in which the bank was promoting a new advertising slogan called, “The Power of Yes”:

        “I stood in front of thousands of senior Washington Mutual managers and executives in
        an annual management retreat in 2004 and countered the senior executive ahead of me on
        the program who was rallying the troops with the company's advertising line, ‘The power
        of yes.’ The implication of that statement was that Washington Mutual would find some
        way to make a loan. The tag line symbolized the management attitude about mortgage
        lending more clearly than anything I can tell you.



545
  2005 “President’s Club 2005 - Maui, Awards Night Show Script,” Washington Mutual Home Loans Group,
Hearing Exhibit 4/13-63a.
