                                                      168

had temporary offices at Washington Mutual for accessing bank information, collecting data
from bank employees, performing analyses, and conducting other exam activities. Washington
Mutual formed a Regulatory Relations office charged with overseeing its interactions and
managing its relationships with personnel at OTS, the FDIC, and other regulators.

       During the year, OTS examiners issued “findings memoranda,” which set forth particular
examination findings, and required a written response and corrective action plan from WaMu
management. The memoranda contained three types of findings. The least severe was an
“observation,” defined as a “weakness identified that is not of regulatory concern, but which may
improve the bank’s operating effectiveness if addressed. … Observations may or may not be
reviewed during subsequent examinations.” The next level of finding was a “recommendation,”
defined as a “secondary concern requiring corrective action. … They may be included in the
Report of Examination … Management’s actions to address Recommendations are reviewed at
subsequent or follow-up examinations.” The most severe type of finding was a “criticism,”
defined as a “primary concern requiring corrective action … often summarized in the ‘Matters
Requiring Board Attention’ … section of the Report of Examination. … They are subject to
formal follow-up by examiners and, if left uncorrected, may result in stronger action.” 606

        The most serious OTS examination findings were elevated to Washington Mutual Bank’s
Board of Directors by designating them as a “Matter Requiring Board Attention” (MRBA).
MRBAs were set forth in the ROE and presented to the Board in an annual meeting attended by
OTS and FDIC personnel. Washington Mutual tracked OTS findings, along with its own
responses, through an internal system called Enterprise Risk Issue Control System (ERICS).
ERICS was intended to help WaMu manage its relationship with its regulators by storing the
regulators’ findings in one central location. In one of its more unusual discoveries, the
Subcommittee learned that OTS also came to rely largely on ERICS to track its dealings with
WaMu. OTS’ reliance on WaMu’s tracking system was a unique departure from its usual
practice of separately tracking the status of its past examination findings and a bank’s
responses. 607

        The FDIC also participated in the examinations of Washington Mutual. Because WaMu
was one of the eight largest insured banks in the country, the FDIC assigned a full-time
Dedicated Examiner to oversee its operations. Typically, the FDIC examiners worked with the
primary regulator and participated in or relied upon the examinations scheduled by that regulator,
rather than initiating separate FDIC examinations. At least once per year, the FDIC examiner
performed an evaluation of the institution’s risk to the Deposit Insurance Fund, typically relying
primarily on the annual Report on Examination (ROE) issued by the primary regulator and the
ROE’s individual and composite CAMELS ratings for the institution. After reviewing the ROE
as well as other examination and financial information, the FDIC examiner reviewed the
CAMELS ratings for WaMu to ensure they were appropriate.



606
    Descriptions of these terms appeared in OTS findings memoranda. See, e.g., 6/19/2008 OTS Findings
Memorandum of Washington Mutual Bank, at Bisset_John-00046124_002, Hearing Exhibit 4/16-12a.
607
    See April 16, 2010 Subcommittee Hearing at 21 (information supplied by Treasury IG Thorson for the record).
