                                                      166

         In 2009, OTS oversaw about 765 thrift-chartered institutions. 600 OTS supervised its
thrifts through four regional offices, each led by a Regional Director, Deputy Director, and
Assistant Director. Regional offices assigned an Examiner-in-Charge to each thrift in its
jurisdiction, along with other supporting examination personnel. Approximately three-quarters
of the OTS workforce reported to its four regional offices, while the remaining quarter worked at
OTS headquarters in Washington, D.C. Washington Mutual, whose headquarters were located in
Seattle, was supervised by the Western Region Office which, through the end of 2008, was based
in Daly City, California.

        During the years reviewed by the Subcommittee, the OTS Executive Director was John
Reich; the Deputy Director was Scott Polakoff; the Western Region Office Director was Michael
Finn and later Darrel Dochow; and the Examiners-in-Charge at WaMu were Lawrence Carter
and later Benjamin Franklin.

        (2) Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
         WaMu’s secondary federal regulator was the FDIC. The FDIC’s mission is to maintain
stability and public confidence in the nation’s financial system by insuring deposits, examining
and supervising financial institutions for safety and soundness and consumer protection, and
managing failed institutions placed into receivership. 601 The FDIC administers the Deposit
Insurance Fund, which is the primary mechanism used to protect covered deposits at U.S.
financial institutions from loss. The Deposit Insurance Fund is financed through fees assessed
on the insured institutions, with assessments based on the amount of deposits requiring
insurance, the amount of assets at each institution, and the degree of risk posed by each
institution to the insurance fund.

         To minimize withdrawals from the Deposit Insurance Fund, the FDIC is assigned backup
supervisory authority over approximately 3,000 federally insured depository institutions whose
primary regulators are the Federal Reserve, OCC, and, until recently, OTS. Among other
measures, the FDIC is authorized to conduct a “special examination” of any insured institution
“to determine the condition of such depository institution for insurance purposes.” 602 To
facilitate and coordinate its oversight obligations with those of the primary bank regulators and
ensure it is able to protect the Deposit Insurance Fund, the FDIC has entered into an inter-agency
agreement with the primary bank regulators. 603 The 2002 version of that agreement, which was
in effect until 2010, stated that the FDIC was authorized to request to participate in examinations
of large institutions or higher risk financial institutions, recommend enforcement actions to be
taken by the primary regulator, and if the primary regulator failed to act, take its own
enforcement action with respect to an insured institution.

600
    2009 OTS Annual Report, “Agency Profile,” http://www.ots.treas.gov/_files/482096.pdf.
601
    See “FDIC Mission, Vision, and Values,” http://www.fdic.gov/about/mission/index.html.
602
    12 U.S.C. § 1820(b)(3).
603
    The interagency agreement is entitled, “Coordination of Expanded Supervisory Information Sharing and Special
Examinations.” During the time period of the Subcommittee’s investigation, the 2002 version of the interagency
agreement, signed by the FDIC, Federal Reserve, OCC, and OTS, was in effect. In July 2010, the federal financial
regulators agreed to adopt a stronger version, discussed later in this Report.
