                                                      167

         For the eight largest insured institutions at the time, the FDIC assigned at least one
Dedicated Examiner to work on-site at the institution. The examiner’s obligation is to evaluate
the institution’s risk to the Deposit Insurance Fund and work with the primary regulator to lower
that risk. During the period covered by this Report, Washington Mutual was one of the eight and
had an FDIC-assigned Dedicated Examiner who worked with OTS examiners to oversee the
bank.

       During the years examined by the Subcommittee, the FDIC Chairman was Sheila Bair;
the Acting Deputy Director for the FDIC’s Division of Supervision and Consumer Protection’s
Complex Financial Institution Branch was John Corston; in the San Francisco Region, the
Director was John Carter and later Stan Ivie, and the Assistant Director was George Doerr. At
WaMu, the FDIC’s Dedicated Examiner was Stephen Funaro.

        (3) Examination Process
         The stated mission of OTS was “[t]o supervise savings associations and their holding
companies in order to maintain their safety and soundness and compliance with consumer laws,
and to encourage a competitive industry that meets America’s financial services needs.” The
OTS Examination Handbook required “[p]roactive regulatory supervision” with a focus on
evaluation of “future needs and potential risks to ensure the success of the thrift system in the
long term.” 604 OTS, like other bank regulators, had special access to the financial information of
the thrifts under its regulation, which was otherwise kept confidential from the market and other
parties.

        To carry out its mission, OTS traditionally conducted an examination of each of the
thrifts within its jurisdiction every 12 to 18 months and provided the results in a Report of
Examination (ROE). In 2006, OTS initiated a “continuous exam” program for its largest thrifts,
requiring its examiners to conduct a series of specialized examinations during the year with the
results from all of those examinations included in an annual ROE. The Examiner-in-Charge led
the examination activities which were organized around the CAMELS rating system used by all
federal bank regulators. The CAMELS rating system evaluates a bank’s: (C) capital adequacy,
(A) asset quality, (M) management, (E) earnings, (L) liquidity, and (S) sensitivity to market risk.
A CAMELS rating of 1 is the best rating, while 5 is the worst. In the annual ROE, OTS
provided its thrifts with an evaluation and rating for each CAMELS component, as well as an
overall composite rating on the bank’s safety and soundness. 605

        At Washington Mutual, OTS examiners conducted both on-site and off-site activities to
review bank operations, and maintained frequent communication with bank management through
emails, telephone conferences, and meetings. During certain periods of the year, OTS examiners

604
    2004 OTS Examination Handbook, Section 010.2, OTSWMEF-0000031969, Hearing Exhibit 4/16-2.
605
    A 1 composite rating in the CAMELS system means “sound in every respect”; a 2 rating means “fundamentally
sound”; a 3 rating means “exhibits some degree of supervisory concern in one or more of the component areas”; a 4
rating means “generally exhibits unsafe and unsound practices or conditions”; and a 5 rating means “exhibits
extremely unsafe and unsound practices or conditions” and is of “greatest supervisory concern.” See chart in the
prepared statement of Treasury IG Eric Thorson at 7, reprinted in April 16, 2010 Subcommittee Hearing at 107.
